---
title: VIVUM 2018 - The good, the bad and the ugly
layout: default
category: blog1
type: event
---





VIVUM 2018 is an enormous student organized event at The International School, Bangalore that markets themselves as "India's largest student led festival."

I had the pleasure of going to VIVUM on the 23rd and 24th of August, and it ended up being really fun. Albeit not what I expected, I had a fun time and enjoyed being a part of the festival.
VIVUM is one of the most well organized school based events I have ever been to. It is simply amazing how they managed to run such a grand and enormous festival as well as they did. It started in a grand manner, in an auditorium with flashing lights, smoke, and all the included paraphernalia. There were some well choreographed dances presented on stage, and some generic compering done to introduce the event. The only shortcoming of the opening ceremony was the skit they added in between the dance and song performances for the opening. It broke the momentum and the energy that the dances created along with the heavy speakers that surrounded us with bassy noise. It felt forced, and I thought it would have been better implemented as a separate part of the ceremony. All of the performances were properly themed after the event's slogan: Run As One.
The highlight of the opening ceremony was the arrival of Danish sait, a popular stage performer and radio commentator. I find it really nice that the folks at TISB manage to get a popular celebrity to come and speak at the event each year. Although this dwarfs the significance of the effort they put into their song and dance, it brought more energy into the event. The problem was that it did not live consistently up to the hype.

####Timing
Student led festivals like VIVUM tend to run into issues with time management, and since that is somewhat ignorable. However, as the organizers of a festival marketed as "India's largest student led festival", I feel that they should have educated their student volunteers on what to do in case of a time shortage. My team mate and I had to wait for about half an hour before the volunteers at the radio shack told us where to go and when. Then we had to wait for an even longer time for our event to start. It was slightly disconcerting, but still manageable. Howwever, day 2 was better and the students were well informed. Needless to say, the volunteers and organizers were very nice people, and somehow tolerated my snarky remarks when I was questioning them.
On day 2, however, the volunteers were more well informed and aware of what was going on.

####Event organization
There were many events at VIVUM which appealed to me. Hence, instead of picking what I usually do(coding related), I decided to go for the Trivia Quiz competition. I was very excited for it, and was utterly disappointed. What I have realized at VIVUM is that they have some main events (Interschool Basketball, Codefest, Battle of the Bands, and so on) and then there are some side events that are shoddily put together(Trivia, Gully Cricket, and some other). There's a large rift in the organization and manner these are put together, as some sports events like basketball were umpired by professional coaches while less sought after events like Gully cricket were not even looked after(allegedly, a football coach was the umpire!). This was very sad to look at, and some students including me were let down.
Otherwise, many main events lived up to the hype, like the Codefest(Actual cisco Employees had come), X-Cross, and amany others. I dont want to undermine these events, as they were executed in a professional and clean manner.

####My Event - Trivia
Coming down to my own event, Trivia, there was a very long waiting time, after which there were three extremely quick rounds of quizzing. The format was done correctly, but the execution of the quiz was very unprofessional. We were sitting in an empty classroom with three tables, and the rapid fire round was not done with buzzers. We had to tap the table to answer. I found the chance of human error very annoying, but couldn't do much about it. It seemed stingy, more than anything. Even the finals, which were supposed to be on day 1, weren't really that great. It was hhighly unprofessional and felt casual. the final round was very strange, and the rules looked like they were made by a toddler. I was extremely gratified when we got to the end of the quiz, more than anything.

####Consistency is key
The only major shortcoming that I'd complain about in VIVUM would be consistency. When you make a good impression, you have to make sure that you maintain the impression and make sure that it lasts in a student's mind, especially when you're organizing a festival of such large proportions. for example, I expected the prizes to be much better. VIVUM 2018 was sponsored by brands like Tommy hilfiger, and if they put even a slight amount of money they get from partners, they could give some sort of incentive for the students to come and try again. When me and my partner won the trivia quiz for our school, we were utterly dejected to get a plain certificate for sitting in a dull classroom and answering questions for more than 3 hours. My friends who had gone for X Cross were also only given certificates for being the best at it. Getting a tangible reward(like a trophy) would have been wonderful, but we had to settle for a plain certificate instead.

###A place to have fun
VIVUM, as a festival, functions best at what it is supposed to be: A place to have fun, be it professional or casual. The enormous TISB campus is fun to walk around, and the main ground is basically a carnival where you can buy food and play some simple games. It' s a great place to go to if you have friends from other school, and some money to blow. They promise that all profits raised from VIVUM are donated to charity, and that's a great thing to do, considering the size of the event. It's an excellent place to make friends and find like minded people, as there are people, and a lot of them. Although some things fell short of what I expected, we all had fun at the event, and got to skip two days of school while doing so. In fact, the only reason I stayed for the second day of the quiz was because the questioner made it fun to play along. You have the chance to meet a lot of great people, while doing something you like. I mostly enjoyed VIVUM during the time I was present in it.
