---
title: What I learned in IIIT Kalyani's Winter of Code (LLVM Project)
layout: post
type: code, edu
---

Thanks to my friend [plastic](https://akshitadixit.github.io/), I decided to enroll in an open source program
called Winter of Code. I was in for a thorough beating.

[IIIT Kalyani's GDSC Winter of Code](https://gdsc-woc.tech/) (WOC) started in around November. Most communication on it happens
through Discord, and some happened through mail, mostly via Devfolio.
I would have preferred more mail updates, and I would have also preferred tighter
scheduling. WOC begins similar to Summer of Code, where you are given three slots for proposals, and a 
proposal format. I was quite worried about how I'd do in this stage, but if you have done any related writing/open source work
before, this part is quite easy and chill. A good thing that WOC staff do is to make sure that you contact your mentors early.
In the case of WOC, some mentors are also students, and this makes for much better conversation sometimes. Basically, 
contact your mentors early, and keep in touch with them. They are your best friend in this kind of program.
I have to endorse my mentor, [Nimish Mishra](https://github.com/NimishMishra) for being very patient, prompt and helpful
throughout the project timeline. I would've made little progress without his help.

The open source organization I wanted to target was the LLVM backend. My proposal was a loose, overoptimistic project about
adding features and fixing bugs in the LLVM project.
[You can see it here.](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oYlmuBohbZYsDE_3Ajp70blvm73SH5tryUoljzACAQs/edit?usp=sharing)
The most important thing you can learn from this proposal is that I finished none of the things I wrote in it. There were many
problems:
- This is a freeform project. This means you have to find your own issues and present them. Your mentor will not do the choosing
  for you. A good thing in some ways, but most importantly a very easy way to shoot yourself in the foot.
- LLVM is *enormous*. Being specific helps a lot, and choosing something that your mentor understands is usually more practical.
  I decided to work on a backend issue relating to `opt` in the end, and both me and my mentor needed to do a lot of learning 
  in order to make it work.
- Have a schedule in your proposal no matter how rudimentary. Finding motivation is difficult in open source, and keeping
  yourself accountable is much easier with a schedule.

Once that period was over, the learning and coding phase began. The issue I chose to tackle was
[this one.](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/50308#issuecomment-1007952551). It's still open, so you can already 
guess how it went. Mainly for this reason, choose something your mentor(s) have experience in. It makes contributing much 
easier, and it makes learning much faster. I was given the chance, but I wanted to work on a hard issue (so much for knowing 
your limits). I went ahead and took a few weeks to get in touch with LLVM, reading tons of pages, understanding the IR, going
around the chatrooms, so on. Learning about LLVM is endless. You can read the docs and code for months together and still have
no idea about 90% of the project.

When I began coding, the first road bump was building LLVM. Just building LLVM has multiple pages dedicated to it. Most 
regular contributors to the project seem to have a VPS or similar thing that they can SSH into in order to test their builds.
I did not
have that luxury, so I just had to run the build on my 8GB of RAM. This did not go well. My unfamiliarity with build systems was
quite the problem here. Luckily with my mentor's help, I managed to get it to build only the things I needed instead of
crashing my PC. The average LLVM build on 8GB RAM, forced to a single core (even without subprojects) takes more than an hour.
Even on decent hardware like mine, this meant
that simply testing even a single line change takes most of the day. There's a lot of good ways to debug in LLVM, but few good
ways to save your time on building.

The actual development side is a different struggle. Finding the necessary file is difficult, but actually not very hard. It is
much easier when you ask around on the IRC (thanks LebedevRI) and your mentor. Since this was a "beginner" issue, most of the
work was supposed to be in one file. I went on multiple tangents, but the actual work was supposed to be done in 
`LoopIdiomRecognize.cpp` or one of its henders. There's an entire article that is dedicated to doing development in LLVM that
illustrates basic objects, macros and other helpful things, and it still isn't very easy to understand the codebase. There's tons
and tons of global variable mutation, things which reference other headers, and some of the most cursed dependency graphs I've
ever seen. The dependency graphs generated from this codebase could be, with little modification, turned into Elden Ring
bosses.

One way to simplify working with this was using C++ devtools. I used vscode extension for a little while, only to realize that
now, I had to worry about the language server eating RAM. Either the build crashes your PC or the devtools crash your PC. That
being said, the extension is *still* a godsend. Just make sure you don't look up a name with too many references.

By the end of WOC, I managed to submit a very wrong patch to LLVM's phabricator, and then I learned that it was emitting
malformed IR. That was about all the progress I had managed to make. I tried a few other things before the final report 
deadline, but I was unable to get at any proper solution that would result in correct IR without sacrificing the performance of
the LoopIdiomRecognize pass. 

The great part about Winter of Code is that it is low-stakes. Trying and failing is encouraged, and they incentivize learning
alongside progress. I did learn many things, and most of those many things I did not expect to learn. It was mildly fun and
mildly painful, and quite a good experience overall. Even though my project was not a success in any way, it was a harsh yet
necessary awakening to how bigger projects tend to be in real life. It also gave me a new hatred for LLVM and C++, and I guess
that is overall a good thing.