---
title: Lil and Advent of Code
layout: post
type: code
---

This year's Advent of code language was Lil. I skipped day 16, 19, 22 part 2, 24 and 25.

This year I figured I shouldn't put too much pressure on myself, so I didn't solve anything that took more than 3 hours. I was 
solving the problems in Lil, using the **CLil** implementation. I usually post my solutions on reddit, so if you've seen me on
the threads, hi!

###### Lil vs other Array languages in AOC

The APL crowd on reddit every year usually consists of /u/jayfoad, /u/voidhawk, and a few newcomers (/u/jaybosamiya has been there
since last year). Advent of Code usually isn't amazing for array languages, so it's a good place to check how well you can make
things work, gauge how well array languages fit with your methods of thinking.

An honorable mention to /u/TeddyDD93, who was also solving in Lil till Day 6.

This year has copious amount of simulation and pathfinding, both of which need some level of involvement to express well in array
languages. [Troels Henriksen](https://futhark-lang.org/blog/2022-12-25-reflections-on-advent-of-code.html) has stated that this
year's problems allowed for meaningful parallel computation, and I hope I managed to do some justice to that.

The most common problems in AOC arise from having to do one thing at a time: imperative algorithms, lots of mutation, or something
along those lines. Lil merges the ideas of Lua with K, ending up with a frankenstein that is really fun to use. Lil mainly
differs in the lua aspect, having explicit loops with good syntax:
```
each x in arr/dict/table
end
while x
end
```
The parts where Lil is like an ordinary scripting language are painstakingly integrated into the array language hidden inside it:
all tables, dicts, lists are treated equally in loops and vectorized operations. Lil is also juggling these ideas along with the
ideas present in Decker, its parent environment.

Lil sounds great for advent of code so far, having dictionaries and lists, almost pythonic in nature, but Lil is also made to have
as few errors as possible. It is of note that I only ever had two types of errors turn up during December:
- Syntax errors (more often than not, from multiple `end`s)
- Segmentation faults (implementation issues, or me fumbling with array interfaces)

This is because *basically* everything else that doesn't make sense to Lil always returns a 0. Sometimes `""`. Regardless, this
causes a lot of confusion in code cause you have no idea where you created a zero. One zero in a weird place creates newer, funnier
zeroes everywhere. Print debugging with `show[]` is useful, just like in every array language.

Lil is only mildly frustrating due to the above problem, my main pet peeve was that it was so long to write and rewrite array 
oriented things in it. Something like `&'` in K becomes
```
each x in lst
  extract index where value from x
end
```
Conciseness is a boon, and it became much more obvious when I rewrote the solutions in BQN. Lilt also doesn't contain many K
primitives due to arbitrary design constraints, but K's features are very much present just in more verbose ways. Factoring out
these primitives into functions is useful, but it results in the Q problem: you have so. many. square brackets.

Speaking of arbitrary design constraints, `else if` is not present in lil, which led me to a lot of cases where
`end end end end end` became a common occurrence. If it weren't so funny, I probably would have quit using lil for Advent of
Code.

##### The Lil Experience
Lil overall is a very competent scripting language. You can load your own library functions from different files with
```
libname:eval[read["lib.lil"]].vars
```

lilt's `eval[]` is a bit weird, however, and doesn't have native functions available. Always 
make sure to return a string for formatting helpers, so you can print it in your actual program.

`parse` is really versatile, and it works extremely well on a variety of problems. `split` and `parse` together were easy pickings
for input parsing *and* validation for most of the days. I wish I could specify repeating patterns, but that is obviously too
much to be asking from lil. `glguy` from the `#adventofcode` IRC on libera.chat had an interesting library that did so.

Dictionaries are terrible for performance. They are *ordered* sequences of pairings between keys and values, so lookup is painfully long. They
are still worth using, just in limited amounts. I should have made my own hashmap implementation or a tree based implementation,
but I realized that I needed faster ones too late.

`each` loops are also slow in the long term. I recommend `each` only if you plan on using every intermediate result. `while` loops
with counters are the way to go for most things, especially useful in the simulation tasks where you're doing thousands of 
iterations.

`in` is a vectorizing binary operator, so you cannot check if a list is present in a list of lists. You'll need a combination of
`each`, `~` and `max` to get the same result.

Lil overall is pretty slow, and it has a lot of leeway for optimization. Using it for Advent of Code in itself is a challenge,
because it is made to be small and cozy, mainly to fit well with Decker. I did intend on making a visualization for one of the 
days, but it got too time consuming to solve the problems themselves. Some days took *very* long to run, and it was obvious that it was not smart to wait more than
an hour to wait for day 16 to execute and potentially provide a wrong result. It was still quite fun, and I might actually do it again,
if I feel like testing my patience. 

A big thanks to all the people this year who made Advent of Code a little less lonely and a little easier to understand and solve.
Kacarott, chunes, gifti from Factor, hyperneutrino, Unrelated String, emanresu, Aiden Chow from Stack Exchange, Lyricly and 
umnikos from Esolangs. Most importantly, thanks to John Earnest for making such a cool environment, and providing helpful support
for it throughout November and December. I hope all of you had a great December, and I wish that you have a great year ahead in 2023.

**Advent of Code Links**
- [My Solutions](https://github.com/razetime/aoc)
- [BQN solvers](https://mlochbaum.github.io/BQN/community/aoc.html)
- [K solvers](https://k.miraheze.org/wiki/Advent_of_Code)
- [APL solvers](https://apl.wiki/Advent_of_Code#Individuals%27_solutions)

**Decker links**
- [Decker](https://beyondloom.com/decker)
- [Lil documentation](https://beyondloom.com/decker/lil.html), effectively my bible for this month
- [Decktember submissions](https://itch.io/jam/decktember/entries)
- [Awesome Decker](https://github.com/1jss/awesome-decker/issues)
- [John Earnest on the Array Cast, Dec 23](https://www.arraycast.com/episodes/episode43-john-earnest-decker)
