---
title: On CodeWars and Factor
layout: post
type: code, fun
---

CodeWars is a site that tries its best not to make its users feel like crap.

Most programming sites have a hostile
air about them which always kills all my interest in them. They may have their own communities, but they're just plainly awful
for learning, they feel so businesslike. Codewars somehow manages to step past these things and actually make a decent place to
learn programming. I have tried Exercism recently, but it doesn't test as many corners of language skill as well as Codewars
does, being too restrictive with skill progression. Codewars goes in the choose your own adventure route and I tend to get a lot
more out of it due to the freedom it gives.

Codewars does a lot of simple things very well. It makes an introduction to the platform very simple, it has a lot of languages,
and makes them generally usable on every problem. There is more of a focus on solving the problem and understanding the purpose
of one's code, which makes it really great. Most exercises (called "katas") are made by the community, and they have a nice 
feedback system. What keeps me coming back to codewars is how it promotes communal learning, letting you peek and ask about
answers you don't understand, and still get points for it. It's gamified in a way that doesn't promote endless grinding,
rather going in the direction of leaving no gaps in your learning.

Codewars's merits alone wasn't quite enough to get me into problem solving for fun, but luckily a few kind souls managed to get
Factor into its language selection. Factor gave me motivation to write long programs again. 
I initially found Factor back in March of 2021, where I struggled with how its most basic functionality was segmented into a 
hundred or so packages. My interest quickly died out as I was very shallow in my understanding of it, and it is very annoying to
use outside the listener. However, in August 2022 I found it again and it was.. a pleasant surprise.

The odd fragmentation of Factor's packages is still a maor annoyance to me, but it is fascinating how far they have gone to make
Factor pleasant to program in. There is a great flow to writing things in Factor, it throws out burdensome principles of old to
be genuinely convenient without having to sacrifice the efficiency of the robust nature of its core.
What this effectively means is you can program Factor as though it were Forth, and you can program factor in an imperative or
functional style. It allows the programmer to express their ideas without abruptly getting in the way, keeping its libraries
general, favouring correctness and completeness, and packaging all relevant functionality with the core language. The
pros of using Factor have been discussed [time](https://jedahu.blogspot.com/2010/08/why-i-like-factor.html) and 
[time again](https://missingfaktor.blogspot.com/2012/07/lisp-factor-features-compare.html), and there's always some hidden
corner of it that the user can find and use to save time and effort.

There is a distinct beauty to Factor having everything in one place that makes the fragmentation of all of it less dull. You can
singlehandedly do every single potential thing you want within Factor, 
- you can edit the help to suit your own needs, add tips, documentation
- customize the Factor listener with rc files, bootstrap those changes
- Create and use existing editor integrations, along with full installer setups

And beyond this, you can do most if not all of these things without restarting the listener even once. Factor lets you see
everything *live*. You can see every change live, rapidly prototype things inside and outside the listener without much problem,
including graphical applications (the [2020 talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OLh61q4c4XE) shows some impressive things, if
you're interested). In a way this reminds me of how APL family languages are generally developed, with instant feedback and
factoring of longer expressions into shorter ones. Even though Factor does not lend itself as well to this approach due to its
innate verbosity, it still shines through with the sheer breadth of things you can use it for.

Factor innately respects your time, and like Codewars, it understands what makes programmers feel like crap. There's significant
involvement of the Factor community in its development, and that really shows with the plethora of professional and creative
libraries alike that a new Factor user can learn from. It makes contribution so simple, and the maintainers, the people that use
Factor are friendly and welcoming. That infectious atmosphere has really gotten me to work on things inside and outside of 
Factor that improve the ecosystem, like a tree sitter grammar, and a potential command line argument parser. I'm glad I found
it, and even despite my qualms with the stack effect inference, the difficult errors and its overall verbosity, I still find it
to be truly brilliant.
